Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo has applied to court to extend the term of the state capture inquiry, saying if he does not get an extension it would “render useless” the work of the commission so far. He has also said he is likely to narrow the scope of the commission’s work — to the original parameters set by former public protector Thuli Madonsela in her State of Capture report — and refer the rest to other investigative bodies. The commission is meant to end its work in February, but he has asked the court to move the deadline to December. In his application, filed late last month, Zondo set out in detail how broad his terms of reference are: the commission has been mandated to investigate unlawful, improper or unethical awards of tenders (not just to the Guptas, but to anyone) in every national, provincial and municipal department and at every state-owned enterprise. “The difficulty is simply that the width of terms of reference of the commission is such that the commission would have to go for about five if not six years in order to investigate every matter that falls within its mandate as reflected in its terms of reference as they presently stand,” he said. There are as many as 30 state-owned enterprises, along with 29 national departments, 90 or so provincial departments and 200 municipal departments. The commission has also been investigating law enforcement agencies such as the Hawks, the National Prosecuting Authority, Crime Intelligence and the Special Investigating Unit. In its 15 months so far, the commission has looked into eight out of 28 national departments, three or four provincial departments and zero municipal departments, said Zondo. “Logically,” if the commission took 15 months or so to conduct investigations that it has conducted so far,” it would need “probably not less than four years to complete its mandate in terms of its terms of reference.” But Zondo did not ask for a four-year extension. Instead, he differentiated between the parameters of Madonsela’s State of Capture report and those of the president’s terms of reference. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.